[Music]
hello everyone and welcome to Cellular
healing TV I'm your host Meredith dyra
and this is episode number
159 today we have of course Dr Dan Poma
our resident cellular healing specialist
on the line and we're welcoming a very
special guest today Travis
Christopherson we have a really exciting
topic we we've delved into this a lot
but um Travis wrote an incredible book
and it's all about the truth about
cancer so we're going to really dig into
this a little bit more and um just kind
of the myth surrounding it and what he
discovered in in this really Incredible
Book that he wrote so before we we jump
in let me tell you a little bit more
about Travis Travis kristopherson is a
science writer and a graduate of the
Montana State honors program in
molecular biology he received the Nelson
Fellowship for outstanding undergraduate
research and continued graduate research
in bior remediation and cancer Theory
culminating in an MS in material
engineering and science from the South
Dakota School of minds and
Technology he is the author of the
bestselling book tripping the truth the
metabolic theory of cancer the book
offers a historical perspective on the
reemerging metabolic theory of cancer a
theory that contends cancer is
precipitated and driven by damage to
mitochondria very exciting topic welcome
to Cellular healing TV Travis so exited
to have you here thanks for having me
glad to be here yeah Travis welcome and
you know we've had a lot of your uh
friends on the show Thomas safeer you
you actually at the conference right now
uh down in Tampa correct that's right
yep Tom's speaking in about an hour and
a half so I'm excited about that he's
gonna present new data that everyone's
kind of you know on the edge of their
seat to hear yeah I know Tom Thomas is
uh you know no doubt a friend of this
show and you know we've interviewed him
and you know I have to say though Thomas
I love you but you know his book was
over most people's head I enjoyed it I
dug in deep as you did I'm sure however
your book tripping over the truth I mean
that was I think brought the message I
think more clearly for most people it
was a needed book so thank you for that
honestly um H how did you I I love to
get into this you know how did you get
it what's your story man I mean how did
you end up writing a book or a desire to
write the book well like you said to I I
was in the middle of graduate school in
a cancer Theory class and had learned
you know all about the genetic theory
that cancer was through and through a
genetic disease that's what everybody's
taught and so I stumbled on Tom's book
um cancer is metabolic disease and read
through it and was just blown away that
there was this body of evidence as
comprehensive as it was you know
supposing this alternative theory of
cancer yeah and his book was really the
trigger for me and and kicked off this
kind of Journey where I was so curious
to find out more about it and um Tom had
written the science book I mean that was
there like you said but inside that was
this beautiful Rich story that goes all
the way back to otta warberg all these
Char throughout the century while this
theory was was uh you know one of the
most dominant theories at the beginning
of the century and then just fell into
complete
void it was almost ridiculed and now
it's made this incredible comeback so I
wanted to bridge that gap between the
science and The Narrative of this
wonderful story yeah yeah I mean you're
right I mean the history is there I mean
warberg back in
1924 uh he said hey look this is a
damaged mitochondria the cell's not able
to use normal oxygen for energy just to
keep it simple and therefore it's
relying on this primitive form of taking
glucose and fermenting it for energy
right so we know it's this defective
mitochondria and to to survive the DNA
changes and um then all of a sudden it
starts this glucose fermentation process
that we know leads to other problems you
know I I think if you go back to 2006
and I I know that you know this is
something that you talked about
somewhere in your book uh you know it
was the the cancer genome Atlas project
right is that right I mean that's you
know somewhere around that line where
they set out and this reminds me of the
Human Genome Project where they set out
in that project to Bas there must be
hundreds of thousands of genes in the
human species because of all this
amazing function that we have and the
scientists the greatest in the world
walked away going holy cow we have about
the same as a mouse about 24 25,000
jeans right I mean it was it was
devastating to the scientific Community
the same thing happened how are viewers
about
that yeah in in the same number of genes
as a 93 36 cell
worm EXA it's stunned right which it led
to epigenetics as we know it today what
happened in 2006 with the cancer project
beautiful explanation and so in my mind
all this research since Watson and Crick
discovered DNA in 1953 focused on the on
the genetic code right that was going to
be I mean when they announced the Human
Genome Project this was going to be the
end all of medicine we were going to
finally know the script of Life yeah Cur
we know every nook and cranny but lo and
behold there's this another layer of
information above the genome called
epigenetics it turns out this may be
very much more important um it turns out
there's very little variation from
person to person in genes and you know
there are a few devastating gene
mutations but those are pretty rare Yeah
by large most of us operate with the
same genomes what makes us so different
and unique typically is a different
expression of gen so
epigenetics this new layer of Discovery
and that goes back to cancer cancer was
always thought to be a disease of DNA of
fixed mutations and throughout the 80s
and 90s clinicians who looked at at
cervical cancer and colon cancer they
noticed that cancer preceded in these
graded series of steps and so the theory
was that each one of these defined steps
was underpinned by a specific genetic
mutation and so the idea was we thought
each type of cancer would have its own
sort of unique signature that would
define it so this led to the cancer
genome Atlas project where sequencing
technology had gotten so good on the
heels of the Human Genome Project that
it became feasible to actually sequence
the Genome of cancer cells and that's
what the project was so I mean basically
in the project they thought they were
going to be able to find certain DNA
mutations and then say that's this
cancer here's a mutation here's that
cancer that's what they set out to do
what happened right right according to
the somatic mutation Theory the dogmatic
Theory each each what cancer is is
mutation to specific genes called oag
gen that sort of rewire the cellular
circuitry towards uncontrolled growth
and they thought each type of cancer
would have its own sort of defined
signature so right the project began in
2006 right away in 2007 what they found
was just strikingly random the degree of
heterogeneity from one type from one
patient's tumor to the next was huge so
that tidy little signature was not there
there was even mutate or even samples
with one driving mutation or zero
driving mutations so this has caused
this kind of this sort of wholesale
rethink about what cancer is and it
cannot just exclusively be a genetic
disease right and so cause cancer
researchers to look at this new level of
of epigenetics as a cause of cancer
because I mean let's face it cancer does
not appear as a chaotic disease it
appears as a sort of deterministic
systemic um disease it's operating under
certain rules and and we use that buzz
word epigenetics a lot so so what does
that mean I'll just give you one example
of that in the cancer cell so this
reversion to the warberg effect right
you we're all born with what's called
isozymes of certain genes so there's one
gene called hexokinase and that
catalyzes the first step of glycolysis
so the utilization of sugar there's 11
steps and that catalyzes the first step
we are all born with four types of this
Gene called isozymes one through four so
as adults we express isozyme one the can
cancer cell will revert to hexokinase 2
now this is so important because
hexokinase 2 does not does not subject
to this this phenomenon called Product
inhibition so it's not under any
regulation it just shoves sugar down
this
pathway and this so this is responsible
for the warberg effect also that enzyme
will bind to the mitochondria and close
this Channel That's responsible for cell
death and this is called apoptosis and
this is another Hallmark feature of
cancer the immortalization of the cell
so this one genetic shift from an enzyme
we have within our bodies um you know
it's it's expressed during embryonic
development and then shut off and then
reexpressed in cancer and so this
epigenetic shift is is responsible for
two Hallmark features of cancer so this
this you know these turning on and
turning off of genes now is is the Hot
Topic so let me just you know for our
viewers sake because you know billions
of dollars has gone in to trying to find
the Gene and drugs to manipulate genes
epigenetics you know we talked about
this on the show before is basically any
environmental stressor can turn on a
gene you know we all have genes of
cancer trust me we do and other genes of
susceptibility but certain factors
toxins included that we talk a lot about
can trigger a gene now the Gene gets
turned on now this process in the
mitochondria changes now it's relying on
sugar as its primary fuel fermenting
glucose even in the presence of oxygen
by the way folks you don't have to
understand that just know it's not
normal but it comes from you know a
mitochondria that you know was changed
by some stressor turned on a gene and
now the cells adapting to live longer
and matter of fact becomes Immortal
meaning that guys when you have bad
cells they you know the body can get rid
of them it can change something in the
mitochondri believe it or not a little
fat called cardiio lipen bam cell dies
that's great you lost a bad cell these
cells that's not happening so all this
is from a stressor changing the genome
and now all these bad things happen is
that a good summary for our
viewers fastic and you know you look at
the body and and that's what we like
this this process you were talking about
of cell death if you do have mutations
your body is extremely efficient of
getting ready those cells through
process right and every day you know
billions of cells die and then billions
of cells divide via stem cells to
replace those cells in our body so we're
this dynamic equilibrium of of death and
renewal that H that happens all the time
and yeah this happens through through
and it's through the exposure of toxins
um all these sort of things that happen
on the day-to-day level that cause cause
damaged cells to just sort of Slough off
and and but occasionally one of these
cells does not die and then this
predisposes us towards cancer you know
my belief is you know when I read
warberg stuff you know he talked about
the damage mitochondria he alluded to
certain stressors starting the damage
right and today when we look at the
amount of toxins uh that we're exposed
to you know what we're injecting in
ourselves for goodness sakes what we're
using you know in our bodies the food
you know that's sprayed with these
chemicals you know it's unavoidable but
I I think that what people have to
understand is that's what's turning on
these genes that's what's changing these
genomes in the mitochondria but Travis
nobody in the science is really looking
Upstream to those causes you know I mean
everyone's just talking about trying to
find that miracle drug to change genome
but really we know the cause is
this this goes back to the 80s and and
when if you look at the history of our
tenure with cancer and how we've chosen
to treat it in the in the SE late 70s we
started really pushing chemotherapy we
had a few success with Hotchkins disease
testicular cancer and then Nixon
declared the war on cancer in 71 and you
know we had landed on the moon so
there's kind of this huus at the time
that we could cure cancer with this
these handful of systemic toxins so we
pushed and pushed and pushed and we did
make a little progress but then we hit a
wall and then the the bio staticians
took over in the 80s and go okay well
how successful has this war on cancer
been and they started
counting and what they realized is when
you count in even all the preventative
measures papsmear everything we do all
of our new treatments at that point the
cancer rate had increased
%. so we had we we're we're definitely
were losing the war on cancer we still
are spite builds right and the reason
was is we this this terrible focus on
trying to treat somebody when they come
in where the disease has progressed so
far versus the the prevention which is
clearly the best protocol for treatment
and the focus has been on you're right
exactly it's been on trying to come up
with these drugs and will treat endstage
disease rather than prevention and we
you know we have there's there's
preventative um for cervical cancer the
vaccine I believe is a complete
preventative cure but it gets incredibly
little
attention yeah interesting well tell me
what what's what's going on at the
conference I mean you know you have uh I
think Dominic
dioso who we've interviewed on the show
is down there you have you know so what
what's uh what's going on I mean so you
know bring us some of the
latest yeah so there was there's been a
lot of fascinating talks um ones that
come to mind are treatment you know tons
of stuff about ketones and Ketone bodies
it's the metabolic Therapeutics
conference so there's been a lot of
stuff on Alzheimer's there was a
wonderful talk about the use of MCT oil
in mitigating Alzheimer's and it looks
like it's efficacious anytime we can
raise Ketone bodies it's bypassing the
pathology in many diseases including
Alzheimer's and so uh you know the
miracle of these little compounds just
continue to come in and that's what we
see another talk on beta hydroxy
butyrate that prevents this assembly of
what they call the inflammosome and by
the way that's a ketone beta hydroxy
berate for our viewers right right um
are they're probably familiar with the
ketogenic diet oh yeah okay okay good
right so so another astonishing thing
with ketosis is the prevention of the
systemic inflammation which yeah were
needed for infection but it can get out
of control and be the precipitate many
disease process so um those two stuck in
my mind today Tom's gonna present tom sa
freed on cancer um there's you know
there's exogenous ketones are coming
online there's a lot of talk about those
so yeah lots of interesting stuff yeah
so we do uh you know we've trained a
growing group of practitioners around
the country and you know we do a
multitherapeutic approach with my
cellular detox but we utilize ketosis as
a tool intermittent fasting and even
block fast like Tom does U so Tom and I
have been able to share a lot of
thoughts and you know because we have a
large group to work with and you know
Tom is really doing some amazing work
with fasting and you know for our
viewers you know that just it's forcing
bad cells don't adapt you know I I love
to to say that because it's really
simple autofy you know where the cells
are the body's getting rid of the bad
cells that happens in fasting it forces
ketones really high which as you just
pointed out drives inflammation down and
you know changes DNA a lot of Dominic's
work you know is showing that changing
these bad genes turn off we talked about
genes being turned on ketones have the
ability to turn off some of these genes
so you know putting all this together I
mean I I think we're in an exciting time
Travis I mean what what do you think
about that oh yeah well yeah just as you
were talking about that I I was thinking
Walter Longo gave it talk too about
intermittent fasting and when you do
that you you your organs that when you
fast for a long period of time your
organs actually will become smaller in
size and your your immune system the
number of immune cells decreases then
when you re you repopulate those tissues
with a fresh stem cells so it's like you
get this fresh renewed organ almost or
immune system at that point so
incredible things that he talked about
was astonishing is the importance of
igf-1 which is are familiar with human
growth hormone human growth hormone
really doesn't do anything but it docks
to a receptor which produces igf1 and
that's the anabolic hormone that
promotes growth right and this is it's
always been known that igf-1 is promote
is a promoter of aging and disease and
cancer right but nobody really knew to
what degree so wter Longo they found
this group of people living in Ecuador
that had a a mutation for the receptor
for growth hormon so they're unable to
manufacture
igf1 so as a consequence they're they're
they're dwarves they're extremely short
stature you know they do have some
developmental problems but they are
virtually immune to cancer and diabetes
and they have a terrible lifestyle they
they eat you know a terrible diet high
rates of alcoholism and smoking and
despite that when they they followed 300
of these people for 50 years and only
found one case of cancer in that patient
and almost zero diabetes so the
importance of
igf-1 and the ketogenic diet or
intermittent fasting tamps down igf one
levels typically to almost imperceptible
levels yeah you know and listen for this
when you hear Tom talk here in an hour
or so you know because I I think there's
magic behind being in ketosis and
intermittent fasting Tom talks about you
don't get the benefit of the ketones
until your glucose drops so one of the
things we look at is we want to see in
our patients when they're intermittent
fasting dropping glucose and Rising
ketones as a signal that hey you know
this process that you just described as
happening right autoag is happening stem
cells are being produced you know so you
know the dropping glucose we often find
that you need the Restriction to create
the glucose drop so I always say Don't
eat less eat less often because when
people think of restriction they think
of just eating less like I'm going to
eat less and we know know that doesn't
work long term but intermittent fasting
eating less often creates that
restriction a drop in glucose arise in
ketones I think it puts the the body in
the perfect scenario for all that magic
that you just described increasing stem
cells you know you know everything the
decreasing inflammation and the
utilization of ketones for the brain Etc
that's the magic is intermittent fasting
with keto at least that's what we found
clinically yeah yeah it
and the next layer you know just beyond
even beyond the the energy of Ketone
bodies which that was the initial focus
of the research was this they were so uh
energy dense you know you can get by per
unit of oxygen the ketones generate I
think twice as much energy as sugar yeah
initial focus and it does the
biochemistry is just beautiful it it
energetic Gap in the electron transport
chain it packs your cells with ATP which
is the energy molecule you all to cell
so that was the initial Focus but now
it's it's going beyond that and Tom was
really you know the very simple to
understand it's very intuitively
pleasing to most people they understand
cancer loves sugar and when you look at
a pet scan that's what you see so when
you switch to ketosis and drop blood
sugar you're starving the cancer cell
you know and that's seductive in its
line of reasoning but now we know
irrespective of the glucose
concentration ketones are doing
something else and and as you alluded to
earlier they're operating on a genetic
level they're histone deyas Inhibitors
and so for your for your listeners if
you pull all your chromosomes out of a
single cell and put them end to end
they're about three feet in length so
you have a ton of DNA and You're Made Of
about 50 trillion cells so that DNA is
is wrapped up incredibly tight and it's
wrapped up on these proteins called
histones so beta hydroxy butter the
Ketone body is affecting the
modification of these histones which is
how epigenetics operates how genes get
turned on and turned off so and it's
doing it I have no idea how this evolved
how this happens but it does it in a way
that completely tamps down all the
important transcription factors that are
active in
cancer uh the the important healthiness
of of a of healthy cells so it's the
golden it's you know it's the Holy Grail
of cancer therapies that it makes
healthy cells more re robust while at
the same weak cancer cells so it it's
creates this sort of
beautiful environment for other
therapies to come in and work even
better I I think what you said is
perfect because you just kind of brought
we talked all about the science and what
happens to the cell you know and the
mitochondria but the bottom line is
cancer love sugar and that adaptation
that's made possibly the damage of you
know from toxins in the mitochondria
it's relying on sugar it's fermenting
sugar even the presence of oxygen we
thought okay that is huge with cancer
however we've learned now that by
putting people in ketosis
yes it starts we're switching the energy
of the cell to be majority of fat so if
cancer cells love sugar that's a problem
for a cancer cell so that's one benefit
of ketosis but the other benefit is what
you just said that now we're realizing
that these ketones are actually turning
off these genes and switching them over
and I I think it's amazing look you know
when we look at the history I love
studying history I I I get so much from
ancient cultures every ancient culture
on the planet has always had to go into
ketosis at least once or twice through
you know through a year's time from
multiple reasons whether it's lack of
food food shifts who knows but our DNA
is set up to go into these ketotic
states which I believe simply put during
these states cleans up our DNA it was
it's part of our genome we're meant to
go into ketosis however today because we
have carbohydrates surrounding Us in
every fashion all the time time 247 we
aren't going into ketotic States and
therefore we're building up a lot of bad
genomes triggering by the toxins that
are you know bad Gene makes or bad cell
makes bad cell and by going into ketosis
periodically not even staying in it
we're at at least turning off a lot of
these bad genes this is missing in today
that's my feeling I I couldn't agree
more I think you perfectly characterize
that I think we our bodies are
completely adapted to do that
periodically as a as a cleaning house
mechanism and we've lost that you know
when when the agriculture came around
10,000 years ago we became flushed with
food especially
carbohydrates and most people probably
don't enter ketosis in their lifetime in
the Western World anyway and so that's
why we have this inexorable diabetes
epidemic that's just getting worse and
worse you know uh and you can show this
now on the epigenetic level why this is
happening so yeah going into ketosis
reverses that yeah it reverses all of
these diseases of degeneration seem to
funnel down to the same point of energy
disregulation that going into periodic
ketosis concentrates its therapeutic
effect so yeah you stated that
beautifully and I I just that's kind of
the thrust of this whole conference is
you know the questions are okay this is
incredibly beneficial what is how how do
we get the most out of this do you need
to be in ketosis all the time and I
think the answer to that is you know
probably not probably just entering it
occasionally is good enough no I I I've
come up with a theory you know I called
diet variation AKA Feast famine cycles
and if you mention it to Joe he'll come
out of his skin because I actually
helped Joe I put that in his book I was
one of the content editors for his new
book fat for fuel and uh you know we
talked about Feast famine cycling
because you know my love for looking at
ancient cultures they were always forced
into feast and famine Cycles the change
the adaptation there's magic that
happens in it when you move from ketosis
out of ketosis uh Magic happens I we
have found that this clinically that we
people that trying to move into ketosis
or struggling one reason or another
right just not able to make the
transition even though they're getting
20 10 grams of carbs a day they're just
not getting into ketosis and months of
trying we move them out of ketosis in a
few months move them back in and all of
a sudden they're successful
you know in it's just remarkable what
happens you know in the change I've got
to read you this study I I I
was I found this study right here and um
I found it fascinating I I have to send
it to you so this is um it says a diet
mimicking uh that wasn't it I did this
last time I tried to find the darn study
here it is okay here it is right here so
it's it's diet this was actually on
cancer prevention diet individual
responsiveness for cancer prevention but
in the study in the abstract it said the
last half century has brought Stark
changes in lifestyle that depart from
normal dial cycling and periodic
fluctuations in food availability says
th thus modern times may be
characterized by being constantly in a
feast environment the cellular
consequences may be an increase in the
risk for several diseases including
cancer so the study is saying that look
we're not getting these times of
starvation right we're not getting times
of ketosis production uh we're not even
varying our diet and they're realizing
it led to disease and I was uh up in
Wyoming and I was researching the
American Indians and they realized that
it's this not being in ketosis and then
this other diet in the summer that it's
part of why you know they're triggering
this Gene of uh you know diabetes and
heart disease so anyways just you know
just stuff that no one else is talking
about
Travis yeah absolutely and I'll just
tell you one thing too that was
fascinating to me is you know I at this
is the second year of this conference
and when I wrote the book a lot of this
stuff was clearly theoretical there was
pre-clinical data support and and
especially with cancer research and what
we always have needed are just clinical
we need to get the ball rolling on
clinical trials and so I met I was in
London at a talk a while back and I met
this young MD from uh turkey and turkey
has a much more permissive environment
for treat cancer patients and Stage
cancer patients the doctors are
basically giving the given the
permission to just do what they think is
in the best benefit of the patient so
this young doctor got really enamored
with safe Reed's work it made sense to
him and he's employed many of these
therapies so he puts his patients on a
ketogenic diet he has them fast before
he has to give them chemotherapy as part
of the standard of care but they're
they're given a dose range and so he
uses the lowest dose he can then he does
um then he does what's called two deoxy
glucose which if if you you know read
Tom's book that's one of the drugs he
looks at it's a glycolic himer so it
stops glucose from being utilized in the
cell he uses DCA which is another
metabolically acting small molecule um
then he gives extensive hypo hyperbaric
oxygen throughout this treatment and
hypothermia and he showed me his results
they did 50 patients with lung cancer
and the the standard of care the median
survival with with Stage three four lung
cancer is 8.6 months these guys are
bringing their patients up to 41 months
and their patient population is is
brutal it's a stage four so they get
some of the worst you know cases coming
in and he's show he was showing Rini
these pictures of pet scans with these
people just littered you know just lit
up with cancer and then after this
protocol they called it metabolically
supported chemotherapy and it's just
gone you know and and and some of these
patients these remissions are so
incredibly dramatic so to me this was
this is exactly what we need we need
these guys that are can do this and can
show this to the world and because
because these therapies don't have the
backing of pharmaceutical companies and
they never will it takes a billion
dollars to get to the the burden of
proof for most oncologists which is a
double blind phase three you know
Placebo control trial and there's no
money to take these through those so
it's going to take these selfless you
know bold oncologists to prove it and
the trials on their own and then show
the rest of the world yeah you know I I
think that you know I hate to say this
you know the need to pull the drug
companies
in is almost needed because of the the
the funding the backing the you know
even just in the marketplace getting
this message out there so if we can
thinking different like you said glucose
more glucose blocking drugs which you
know there's there's been some of these
they just haven't gained traction but
what about gluconeogenesis because Tom
talks a lot about the metastatic cancers
you know utilizing glutamine acid for
energy they adapt to that you know
perhap you know I know that he's
experimenting with certain drugs that
can limit you know glutamine reactions
what are your thoughts on
that exactly and that's he was just
bubbling last night because so we my
Foundation has supported research where
he's looking at a cocktail of therapies
right and the missing piece to him was
always glutamine because as as
much as cancer cells love sugar they
Perhaps Love glutamine even more I mean
they they they can utilize GL glutamine
as an energy substrate and so blocking
glutamine is more PL problematic because
our immune systems need glutamine so but
he's experimenting with this drug called
da which is a very very powerful
glutamine inhibitor and if you cycle it
you can use way lower doses when when uh
these mice are on the ketogenic diet so
it's way more efficacious like most
drugs when these my are in a state of
ketosis and he's finding this is just
devastating the cancer cells and he uses
this brutally tough metastatic Mouse
model it's notorious they've never been
able to cure it you know right so
getting so close to being able to almost
cure this this extremely hard Mouse
model and now we have I've you
introduced him to this Turkish doctor so
I hope that his protocol can go from
preclinical to translational and his
clinic in Turkey we can show you know
what this drug what this combination of
stuff can do so Travis what are you
working on right now you know there's a
lot happening you know I mean that's
great you connected Tom to him and
that's going to take this you know to
the next level what are you working on
you know that that kind of these kind of
things um this is just taken on a life
of its own that um this this conference
went from hundred and some people last
year to over 400 this year just
exploded many MDS are here that are you
know sort of progressive in their
thinking and are using these Therapies
are just blown away by how well they're
working so I think you know this is
taking on a life of its own um I'm
working on a book now about epigenetics
which to me is is you know I I didn't
realize how fascinating it was till I've
dug into it so and I think that's the
next Frontier of medicine so that's
where my my focus is right now hey
Travis even our thoughts can change that
genome right toxic thoughts toxins
period real that if you just look at a
book called um uh what's it Beyond
something tiir it just came out and and
a wonderful book and you know tmr's
length at the end of chromosomes is
related cellular Health it's it's like
an aging clock yeah exactly and
wonderful series of studies about just
stress and how we respond to stress how
positive we think circles back to tiir
length and it's incredible I mean yeah
your mental state dayto day affects your
cellular Health on a level I wasn't even
aware of yeah yeah it's like you know we
we get a lot of very challenged people
uh you know my doctors and myself and
you know we know that physical chemical
and emotional stress turns on these bad
genes and it's a problem you know I Des
I think you appreciate this I talk about
why people are getting sick today and
the solution lies in this analogy as
well think of a three-legged stool you
know every leg has to be there for it to
stand up well you have one leg that's
the DNA the epigenetic genes are getting
turned on because of these stressors
right and that's the middle leg the
stressors that are turning on the genes
you know this is a problem today from an
emotional standpoint and a chemical
standpoint then the last leg is the
microbiome that's just being decimated
right now that we know now this
microbiome plays a big role in
epigenetics we're doing some new new
tests that that show that that we can
literally measure the microbiome and
realize then from that from certain
metabolites what genes are actually
being expressed so what we're doing in
our multitherapeutic approach is we're
doing everything that we know to turn
off these bad genes we're removing the
stressors which is key you know physical
chemical and emotional if you're doing
all of it you have a chance to turn
these genes off and lastly we're
affecting the microbiome with a lot of
these ancient healing strategies the
fasting the ketosis there's going to be
new research coming out on ketones
effect on the microbiome you know we in
with these fasting States when you
starve down all bacteria we talked about
stem cells coming back same thing's
happening in the microbiome so when we
starve down the microbiome we're seeing
these genetic changes within the
bacteria so the point is is that when we
put all of this together we create
disease but when we put these all these
treatments together you know we're
getting astounding results and the key
is is putting it all together so that
might excite you but that's what we're
doing we have a larger group of doctors
well yeah I think
the catching up to what you really
astute observational clinicians have
known for a long time you know and I
when you were saying that in these
ancient cultures like you say that have
been on to this for a long time I was
thinking of of a story where somewhere
in the desert where they get dissenter
severe form of diarrhea and the Cure was
to eat camel poop because it had and
then they finally the basic scientists
caught up to it like yeah there's some
beneficial probiotics in this that they
were clearly you know that's why I cured
this this say and they knew this you
know hundreds of years ago and we just
figured out why they were doing it so
yeah you know the art of medicine what
you guys notice in your patients um uh
the basic science seems like sometimes
it's catching up to that Travis think
think about this for a second we know
that the toxic exposures we're getting
is turning on these genes epigenetically
right and then the microbiome is being
decimated and we we're just learning
this connection of our microbiome and
you know turning good genes on and bad
genes off you know so you think about
this complete assault to our microbiome
the chemicals and the genes that are
being triggered I mean this is what's
happening I mean honestly this is why
autoimmune conditions are just running
rampant right now and it's scary it's
scary and it's scary now because the
science is showing that you know this
begins in in utero as you're forming is
speak of my
oos to um uh you know certain toxins it
we now know it affects methylation
patterns of DNA which directly
correlates to your propensity for
obesity and all these problems later on
even you know the vitamins your mom is
exposed to if you're if you're uh if she
was vitamin deficient in her first
trimester or her last trimester and then
they follow these Pat these these people
at later and they have certain disease
patterns so everything is you know
everything along those lines is we're
now finding out is just extraordinarily
important yeah the is another layer of
complexity on top of that that um it's
scary things that there's some people
that say you know we've probably wiped
out caus an Extinction of important gut
bugs that will never get back so yeah
it's time far time we start paying more
attention to that stuff yeah no no doubt
and you know the only solution is put
all of it together you know and you know
that's my fion you know is just getting
a growing group of doctors you know
doing this uh you know that's that's on
The Cutting Edge so well Meredith I was
so interested in this conversation that
I've left you out of it so I apologize
but I better open it up to you for some
questions oh my gosh well this has been
an amazing interview to in Travis what a
wealth of knowledge I'm so excited to to
learn more about your research on
epigenetics and wondering if you could
maybe share or tease us with kind of any
of the the specifics you're working on
with that
book oh man man I'm right in the middle
of it it's to me okay well just a broad
for me the broadness of it is what I
would say is these all these epigenetic
changes that we see in DNA there there's
certain levels there's transcription
Factor levels so if you walk outside you
manufacture vitamin D vitamin D then is
is a transcription Factor it binds to a
receptor in your nucleus and then B
binds to what's called vitamin D
response elements sprinkled throughout
your genome and that flickers about 93
genes to life so just walking out
changes your epome and these genes are
involved in inate immunity it also
flickers to lot grossly upregulates a
gene that that turns tryptophan into
serotonin so when you that's why you
feel good when you go out in the sun
your your thoughts soften you know the
edges of stress soften so it's directly
correlated to your mental state and
that's just walking outside so that's
one layer of the epome the next is the
the way your DNA gets wrapped up as we
talked about beta hydroxy uter can
affect that the packaging of DNA then
DNA itself gets tagged with with little
groups called methyl groups and this
affects genes and so when you are
conceived all these methyl groups are
wiped off you're a clean slate and then
you get they get attached as you grow in
utero and then you're born tuned up your
epigenome is tuned up to express the
right genes but as we age and as we're
exposed to certain Environmental toxins
and so forth that these tags get drifted
and so we start regulation and genetic
expression now to me that where this all
goes is can you reverse that and the the
science is leading us to believe that it
can be
reversed yeah so that that to me is I
mean this is where we could possibly
intervene on aging and we we parse
diseases up into you know distinct
processes when really these are all
converge on Aging itself the the by far
the highest risk factor for for h cancer
is aging it's not smoking so if we can
intervene on this process we could
single-handedly Wipe Out the whole
spectrum of degeneration from cancer to
neurod degeneration and all these things
so that's where this our focus should be
not parsing up diseases and trying to
understand the pathology of each one it
should be intervening on this epigenetic
level so you know it's so broad this
topic and it's so meaningful that it's
it's overwhelming I I just had a thought
when you said about you know just being
in the sun and you know ultimately how
that can turn off bad jeans right I mean
it upregulate good ones I mean it's just
amazing and you're friends with Joe
right so you love him he's watch
conference yeah I think and he's got
these glasses on I mean he's he's living
the he's walking outside to get Sun
every five minutes and oh yeah he drags
me on those walks and all of a sudden
I'm sweating and a you know it's like
you know we got to get the sun right but
uh you know but he yeah he's funny he
lives what he preaches no doubt about it
but you know think about this for a
second you know we because part of my
research with the American Indians was
that that thing of going into ketosis in
the winter but in the summer just like
the hunza people they thought they were
vegetarians I mean they weren't eating
as much meat you know it's like you know
as people would have thought right they
were relying on all these different root
vegetables which arguably would be a
higher carbohydrate diet but yet the sun
had a huge effect on why they were able
to talk that higher carbohydrate diet
think about this when we go into winter
When there's less Sun what's protecting
our genome the ketones the ketones right
the sun can protect the genome more in
the better times you know which could
tolerate us being out of ketosis but in
the winter you know the ketones protect
us just a thought of seasonal you know
ketosis but anyways that's that'll take
us down a whole another route Meredith I
better turn it back to you or him and I
may go all day I know we might have to
do a part two is such a fascinating
conversation and just in closing Travis
thank you so much and I'm just wondering
what would you say if someone is
watching this or listening and got a
recent cancer diagnosis or or has a
loved one who who did What Would you
what would you tell
them you know I I I think for for the
most proactive people do the best so if
you can Empower yourself through just
learning about these about treatments
like this about you know using this
dietary therapy and hopefully your
oncologist is on board because the the
re Like Walter Longo just gave a talk if
you can get into ketosis or fast before
chemotherapy potentially this is going
to greatly increase the efficacy of it
and and mitigate side effects and he's
done a wonderful clinical trial where
they've shown that even objective side
effects like vomiting and hair loss are
incredibly diminished when you're in
ketosis so um you know empowered
patients I think do the best I'm sure
you can attest to that uh so that that's
where I'd say start is just get as much
information you can and and try to use
it you know with your oncologist if it's
possible yeah well great great advice
thank you Travis yeah thank you thank
you so much Dr Poma thank you Travis for
sharing your knowledge this is just such
exciting information and hopefully maybe
we can have you back and delve into
epigenetics a little bit more once that
books out absolutely let's jump into
epigenetics tell our friends over there
hello glad you're there yeah all right I
sure will thank
thanks Travis thanks Dr Pompa thanks
everybody for watching have an awesome
weekend and we'll see you next time bye
[Music]
bye